RESULTS.md, before:

# Results

## First run, 9x9, November 2017.

 - Ran on a cluster of ~1k cores, no GPUs, 400 readouts/move, 64 games played in
   parallel per worker.  Trained on a single P100 machine.
   - No tree re-use
   - No 'resign disabled' holdout
   - No vectorized updates
   - Dir noise probably parameterized wrong
   - `c_puct` a guess at 2.5
   - "Stretch" for moves after the opening
   - No evaluation of new networks
   - [Init Q to 0]( http://computer-go.org/pipermail/computer-go/2017-December/010555.html)
   - Hardcoded not to pass early on (before move 20 i think).
 - Ran for two weeks
 - Evaluated by playing a variety of kyu & dan players, judged to be SDK

This first run was largely intended to confirm that the network and MCTS code
worked and that the algorithm as described would improve.  As such, the CPU-only
version on the smaller board was a modest success.  Even without a number of
enhancements described in the paper (re-use, etc), play was observed to improve
rapidly towards reasonable human play.

We didn't see any 'ladder weakness', probably due to the smaller board size.

What's really shocking is how effectively this worked even with many parts of
the code that were absolutely wrong.  In particular, the batch normalization
calls (`tf.layers.batch_normalization`) were entirely wrong, and the lack of
correct batch normalization almost certainly slowed down progress by an order of
magnitude.

As a result, it's hard to say how effective it was at proving things were
correct.  The results were good enough to assume that everything would work fine
when scaled up to 19x19, but obviously that wasn't true.  As a result, it was
hard to experiment on 9x9s -- If it worked on 9x9s when broken, who was to say
that "working on 9s" was useful or predictive?

Run was stopped as a result of internal resource allocation discussions.

## Second run, 'somebot', 19x19, Dec'17-Jan'18

This second run took place over about 4 weeks, on a 20 block network with 128
filters.  With 4 weeks to look at it and adjust things, we didn't end up keeping
the code constant the whole time through, and instead we were constantly
monkeying with the code.

This ran on a Google Container Engine cluster of pre-release preemptible GPUs;
(TODO: link) Hopefully the product was improved by our bug reports :)

### Adjustments
Generations 0-165 played about 12,500 games each, and each generation/checkpoint
was trained on about 1M positions (compare to DM's 2M positions in AGZ paper).

After transitioning to a larger board size, and a cluster with GPUs, we started
a new run.  Very quickly, we realized that the batch normalization was incorrect
on the layers of the value head.  After around 500k games, we realized the
policy head should also have had its batchnorm fixed.  This coincided with a
*really* sharp improvement in policy error.

Around generation 95, we realized the [initial
Q-value](http://computer-go.org/pipermail/computer-go/2017-December/010555.html)
led to weird ping-ponging behavior inside search, and changed to init to the
average of the parent.

Around v148, we realized we had the learning rate decay time off by an order of
magnitude...oops.  We also started experimenting with different values for `c_puct`, but didn't really see a difference for our range of values between 0.8 and 2.0.

Around v165, we changed how many games we tried to play per generation, from
12,500 games to 7,000 games, and also increased how many positions each
generation was trained on, from 1M to 2M.  This was largely due to how we had
originally read the AGZ paper, where they say they had played 25,000 games with
the most recent model.  However, with 5M games and 700 checkpoints, that works
out to about 7,000 games/checkpoint.  As we were doing more of an 'AZ' approach,
with no evaluation of the new models, we figured this was more accurate.

Around v230, we disabled resignation in 5% of games and checked our
resign-threshold false positive rate.  We'd been pretty accurate, having tuned
it down to about .9 (i.e., odds of winning at 5%) based on our analysis of true
negatives.  (i.e., what was the distribution of the closest a player got to
resigning who ended up winning)

Around v250, we started experimenting with tree reuse to gather data about its
effect on the Dirchlet noise, and if it was affecting our position diversity.
We also changed from 'stretching' the probabilities pi by exponentiating to a
factor of 8 (i.e., temperature 0.125), to making it onehot (infinitesimal
temperature), to leaving it proportional to visits (unity temperature).

There's still ambiguity about whether or not a onehot training target for the
policy net is good or bad, but we're leaning towards leaving pi as the softmax
of visits for training, while using argmax as the method for actually choosing
the move for play (after the fuseki).

### Observations

We put the models on KGS and CGOS as 'somebot' starting around version 160.  The
harness running these models is very primitive: they are single-threaded python,
running nodes through the accelerator with a batch-size of ONE... very bad.  The
CGOS harness only manages to run around 300-500 searches per move.

However, with that said, we were able to watch it improve and reach a level
where it would consistently lose to the top bots (Zen, AQ, Leela 0.11), and
consistently beat the basic bots, GnuGo, michi, the Aya placeholder bots, etc.

Sometime between v180 and v230, our CGOS results seemed to level off.  The
ladder weakness meant our performance on CGOS was split: either our opponents
could ladder us correctly, or they couldn't :)  As such, it was hard to use CGOS as an
objective measurement.  Similarly, while we were able to notch some wins against
KGS dan players, it was hard to tell if we were still making progress.  This led
to our continued twiddling of settings and general sense of frustration.  The
ladder weakness continued strong all the way to the very end, around generation
v280, when our prerelease cluster expired.

On the whole, we did feel pretty good about having answered some of the
ambiguities left by the papers:  What was a good value for `c_puct`?  Was
tree-reuse for evaluation only, or also for selfplay?  What was up with
initializing a child's Q to zero?  How about whether or not to one-hot the
policy target pi?

Worth observing:  For nearly all of the generations, 3-3 was its ONLY preferred
opening move.  This drove a lot of the questions around whether or not we had
adequate move diversity, sufficient noise mixing, etc.  It is unclear whether
the early errors (e.g., initial 50-100 generations with broken batch-norm) have
left us in a local minima with 3-3s that D-noise & etc. are not able to
overcome.


## Third run, Minigo, v250-..., Jan 20th ongoing

As our fiddling about after v250 didn't seem to get us anywhere, and due to our
reconsidering about whether or not to one-hot the policy network target ('pi'), we rolled
back to version 250 to continue training.

We also completely replaced our custom class for handling training examples
(helpfully called `Dataset`, and predating tf.data.Dataset) with a proper
implementation using tfExamples and living natively on GCS.  This greatly
simplified the training pipeline, with a few hiccups at the beginning where the
training data was not adequately diversified.

The remaining differences between this run and the described paper:

1. No "virtual losses"
  - Virtual losses provide a way to parallelize MCTS and choose more nodes for
    parallel evaluation by the accelerator.  Instead of this, we parallelize by
    playing multiple games per-worker.  The overall throughput is the same, in
    terms of games-per-hour, but we could increase the speed at which games are
    finished and thus the overall recency of the training data if we implemented
    virtual losses.
  - A side effect of virtual losses is that the MCTS phase is not always
    evaluating the optimal leaf, but is evaluating instead its top-8 or top-16
    or whatever the batch size is.  This has a consequence of broadening the
    overall search -- is this broadening important to the discovery of new moves
    by the policy network, and thus the improvement of the network overall?  Who
    knows? :)
2. Ambiguity around the transformation of the MCTS output, pi.
3. Too few filters (128 vs 256).


Results: After a few days a few troublesome signs appeared.
  - Value error dropped far lower than the 0.6 steady-state we had expected from
    the paper. (0.6 equates to ~85% prediction accuracy).  This suggested our
    new dataset code was not shuffling adequately, leading to value overfitting
  - This idea was supported when, upon further digging, it appeared that the
    network would judge transformations (rotation/reflection) of the *same
    board* to have wildly different value estimates.

These could also have been exacerbated by our computed value for the learning
rate decay schedule being incorrect.

This run is halted while we:
  - add random transformations to the training pipeline
  - More completely shuffle our training data.
  - Figure out an equivalent learning rate decay schedule to the one described
    in the paper.

Commit message:

update results with links to new files

RESULTS.md, after:

# Results

## First run, 9x9, November 2017.

 - Ran on a cluster of ~1k cores, no GPUs, 400 readouts/move, 64 games played in
   parallel per worker.  Trained on a single P100 machine.
   - No tree re-use
   - No 'resign disabled' holdout
   - No vectorized updates
   - Dir noise probably parameterized wrong
   - `c_puct` a guess at 2.5
   - "Stretch" for moves after the opening
   - No evaluation of new networks
   - [Init Q to 0]( http://computer-go.org/pipermail/computer-go/2017-December/010555.html)
   - Hardcoded not to pass early on (before move 20 i think).
 - Ran for two weeks
 - Evaluated by playing a variety of kyu & dan players, judged to be SDK

This first run was largely intended to confirm that the network and MCTS code
worked and that the algorithm as described would improve.  As such, the CPU-only
version on the smaller board was a modest success.  Even without a number of
enhancements described in the paper (re-use, etc), play was observed to improve
rapidly towards reasonable human play.

We didn't see any 'ladder weakness', probably due to the smaller board size.

What's really shocking is how effectively this worked even with many parts of
the code that were absolutely wrong.  In particular, the batch normalization
calls (`tf.layers.batch_normalization`) were entirely wrong, and the lack of
correct batch normalization almost certainly slowed down progress by an order of
magnitude.

As a result, it's hard to say how effective it was at proving things were
correct.  The results were good enough to assume that everything would work fine
when scaled up to 19x19, but obviously that wasn't true.  As a result, it was
hard to experiment on 9x9s -- If it worked on 9x9s when broken, who was to say
that "working on 9s" was useful or predictive?

Run was stopped as a result of internal resource allocation discussions.

## Second run, 'somebot', 19x19, Dec'17-Jan'18

This second run took place over about 4 weeks, on a 20 block network with 128
filters.  With 4 weeks to look at it and adjust things, we didn't end up keeping
the code constant the whole time through, and instead we were constantly
monkeying with the code.

This ran on a Google Container Engine cluster of pre-release preemptible GPUs;
(TODO: link) Hopefully the product was improved by our bug reports :)

### Adjustments
Generations 0-165 played about 12,500 games each, and each generation/checkpoint
was trained on about 1M positions (compare to DM's 2M positions in AGZ paper).

After transitioning to a larger board size, and a cluster with GPUs, we started
a new run.  Very quickly, we realized that the batch normalization was incorrect
on the layers of the value head.  After around 500k games, we realized the
policy head should also have had its batchnorm fixed.  This coincided with a
*really* sharp improvement in policy error.

Around generation 95, we realized the [initial
Q-value](http://computer-go.org/pipermail/computer-go/2017-December/010555.html)
led to weird ping-ponging behavior inside search, and changed to init to the
average of the parent.

Around v148, we realized we had the learning rate decay time off by an order of
magnitude...oops.  We also started experimenting with different values for `c_puct`, but didn't really see a difference for our range of values between 0.8 and 2.0.

Around v165, we changed how many games we tried to play per generation, from
12,500 games to 7,000 games, and also increased how many positions each
generation was trained on, from 1M to 2M.  This was largely due to how we had
originally read the AGZ paper, where they say they had played 25,000 games with
the most recent model.  However, with 5M games and 700 checkpoints, that works
out to about 7,000 games/checkpoint.  As we were doing more of an 'AZ' approach,
with no evaluation of the new models, we figured this was more accurate.

Around v230, we disabled resignation in 5% of games and checked our
resign-threshold false positive rate.  We'd been pretty accurate, having tuned
it down to about .9 (i.e., odds of winning at 5%) based on our analysis of true
negatives.  (i.e., what was the distribution of the closest a player got to
resigning who ended up winning)

Around v250, we started experimenting with tree reuse to gather data about its
effect on the Dirchlet noise, and if it was affecting our position diversity.
We also changed from 'stretching' the probabilities pi by exponentiating to a
factor of 8 (i.e., temperature 0.125), to making it onehot (infinitesimal
temperature), to leaving it proportional to visits (unity temperature).

There's still ambiguity about whether or not a onehot training target for the
policy net is good or bad, but we're leaning towards leaving pi as the softmax
of visits for training, while using argmax as the method for actually choosing
the move for play (after the fuseki).

### Observations

We put the models on KGS and CGOS as 'somebot' starting around version 160.  The
harness running these models is very primitive: they are single-threaded python,
running nodes through the accelerator with a batch-size of ONE... very bad.  The
CGOS harness only manages to run around 300-500 searches per move.

However, with that said, we were able to watch it improve and reach a level
where it would consistently lose to the top bots (Zen, AQ, Leela 0.11), and
consistently beat the basic bots, GnuGo, michi, the Aya placeholder bots, etc.

Sometime between v180 and v230, our CGOS results seemed to level off.  The
ladder weakness meant our performance on CGOS was split: either our opponents
could ladder us correctly, or they couldn't :)  As such, it was hard to use CGOS as an
objective measurement.  Similarly, while we were able to notch some wins against
KGS dan players, it was hard to tell if we were still making progress.  This led
to our continued twiddling of settings and general sense of frustration.  The
ladder weakness continued strong all the way to the very end, around generation
v280, when our prerelease cluster expired.

On the whole, we did feel pretty good about having answered some of the
ambiguities left by the papers:  What was a good value for `c_puct`?  Was
tree-reuse for evaluation only, or also for selfplay?  What was up with
initializing a child's Q to zero?  How about whether or not to one-hot the
policy target pi?

Worth observing:  For nearly all of the generations, 3-3 was its ONLY preferred
opening move.  This drove a lot of the questions around whether or not we had
adequate move diversity, sufficient noise mixing, etc.  It is unclear whether
the early errors (e.g., initial 50-100 generations with broken batch-norm) have
left us in a local minima with 3-3s that D-noise & etc. are not able to
overcome.


## Third run, Minigo, v250-..., Jan 20th-Feb 1st (ish)

As our fiddling about after v250 didn't seem to get us anywhere, and due to our
reconsidering about whether or not to one-hot the policy network target ('pi'), we rolled
back to version 250 to continue training.

We also completely replaced our custom class for handling training examples
(helpfully called `Dataset`, and predating tf.data.Dataset) with a proper
implementation using tfExamples and living natively on GCS.  This greatly
simplified the training pipeline, with a few hiccups at the beginning where the
training data was not adequately diversified.

The remaining differences between this run and the described paper:

1. No "virtual losses"
  - Virtual losses provide a way to parallelize MCTS and choose more nodes for
    parallel evaluation by the accelerator.  Instead of this, we parallelize by
    playing multiple games per-worker.  The overall throughput is the same, in
    terms of games-per-hour, but we could increase the speed at which games are
    finished and thus the overall recency of the training data if we implemented
    virtual losses.
  - A side effect of virtual losses is that the MCTS phase is not always
    evaluating the optimal leaf, but is evaluating instead its top-8 or top-16
    or whatever the batch size is.  This has a consequence of broadening the
    overall search -- is this broadening important to the discovery of new moves
    by the policy network, and thus the improvement of the network overall?  Who
    knows? :)
2. Ambiguity around the transformation of the MCTS output, pi.
3. Too few filters (128 vs 256).


Results: After a few days a few troublesome signs appeared.
  - Value error dropped far lower than the 0.6 steady-state we had expected from
    the paper. (0.6 equates to ~85% prediction accuracy).  This suggested our
    new dataset code was not shuffling adequately, leading to value overfitting
  - This idea was supported when, upon further digging, it appeared that the
    network would judge transformations (rotation/reflection) of the *same
    board* to have wildly different value estimates.

These could also have been exacerbated by our computed value for the learning
rate decay schedule being incorrect.

This run was halted after discovering a pretty major bug in our huge Dataset
rewrite that left it training towards what was effectively noise.  Read the gory
details
[here](https://github.com/tensorflow/minigo/commit/9c6e013293d415e90b92097327dfaca94a81a6da).

Our [milestones](https://github.com/tensorflow/minigo/milestone/1?closed=1) to hit before running a new 19x19 pipeline:
  - add random transformations to the training pipeline
  - More completely shuffle our training data.
  - Figure out an equivalent learning rate decay schedule to the one described
    in the paper.


### Fourth run, 9x9s.  Feb 7-

Since our 19x19 run seemed irrepairable, we decided to work on instrumentation
to better understand when things were going off the rails while it would still
be possible to make adjustments.

These [improvements](https://github.com/tensorflow/minigo/milestone/2?closed=1) included:
 - Logging the [magnitude of the
   updates](https://github.com/tensorflow/minigo/commit/360e056f218833938d845b454b4e24158034b58a)
   that training would make to our weights.
 - [Setting aside a
   set of positions](https://github.com/tensorflow/minigo/commit/f941f5ac72d860f1f583392cbeb69d0694373824) to use to detect
overfitting.
 - Improvements to setting up clusters and setting up automated testing/CI.


The results were very promising, reaching pro strength after about a week.

Our models and training data can be found in [the GCS bucket
here](https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/minigo-pub/v3-9x9).
