cc/README.md, before:

# Minigo C++ implementation

This directory contains a in-developent C++ port of Minigo.

## Set up

The C++ Minigo port uses __version 0.11.1__ of the [Bazel](https://bazel.build/)
build system. We have experienced build issues with the latest version of Bazel,
so for now we recommend installing
[bazel-0.11.1-installer-linux-x86\_64.sh](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/releases).

Minigo++ depends on the Tensorflow C++ libraries, but we have not yet set up
Bazel WORKSPACE and BUILD rules to automatically download and configure
Tensorflow so (for now at least) you must perform a manual step to build the
library:

```shell
./cc/configure_tensorflow.sh
```

If you want to compile for CPU and not GPU, then change `TF_NEED_CUDA` to 0 in
`configure_tensorflow.sh`

This will automatically perform the first steps of
[Installing Tensorflow from Sources](https://www.tensorflow.org/install/install_sources)
but instead of installing the Tensorflow package, it extracts the generated C++
headers into the `cc/tensorflow` subdirectory of the repo. The script then
builds the required Tensorflow shared libraries and copies them to the same
directory. The tensorflow cc\_library build target in cc/BUILD pulls these
header & library files together into a format the Bazel understands how to link
against.

## Building

The C++ Minigo implementation requires that the board size be defined at compile
time, using the `MINIGO_BOARD_SIZE` preprocessor define. This allows us to
significantly reduce the number of heap allocations performed. The build scripts
are configured to compile with `MINIGO_BOARD_SIZE=19` by default. To compile a
version that works with a 9x9 board, invoke Bazel with `--define=board_size=9`.

## Running the unit tests

Minigo's C++ unit tests operate on both 9x9 and 19x19, and some tests are only
enabled for a particular board size. Consequently, you must run the tests
multiple times:

```shell
bazel test --define=board_size=9 cc/...  &&  bazel test cc/...
```

## Running with AddressSanitizer

Bazel supports building with AddressSanitizer to check for C++ memory errors:

```shell
bazel build cc:main \
  --copt=-fsanitize=address \
  --linkopt=-fsanitize=address \
  --copt=-fno-omit-frame-pointer \
  --copt=-O1
```

## Running self play:

The C++ Minigo binary requires the model to be provided in GraphDef binary
proto format.

To run Minigo with a 9x9 model:

```shell
bazel build --define=board_size=9 -c opt cc:main
bazel-bin/cc/main --model=$MODEL_PATH
```

To run Minigo with a 19x19 model:

```shell
bazel build -c opt cc:main
bazel-bin/cc/main --model=$MODEL_PATH
```

The Minigo binary has a lot of command line arguments that configure its
behavior, run it with --helpshort to see the full list.

```shell
bazel-bin/cc/main --helpshort
```

## Design

The general structure of the C++ code tries to follow the Python code where
appropriate, however a lot of the implementation details are different for
performance reasons. In particular, the logic that handles the board state
strives for a small memory footprint and eschews data structures more
sophisticated than a simple array in an effort to minimize memory allocations
and maximize cache locality of data. In doing so, the implementation is kept
fairly simple (there is no need for a LibertyTracker) and at the time of writing
performance of the Position code was more than 450x that of its Python
counterpart.

## Inference engines

C++ Minigo currently supports three separate engines for performing inference:

 - tf: peforms inference using the TensorFlow libraries built by
   `cc/configure_tensorflow.sh`.
 - remote: launches a Python subprocess that performs inference using the
   version of TensorFlow installed on the system. The remote inference
   engine is required for running Minigo on Cloud TPU.
 - lite: performs inference using TensorFlow Lite, which runs in software on
   the CPU.

The Compilation and linking of these engines into the `//cc:main` binary is
controlled by the Bazel defines `--define=tf=<0,1>`, `--define=remote=<0,1>`
and `--define=lite=<0,1>`.

The choice of which engine to use is controlled by the command line argument
`--engine=<tf,remote,lite>`.

## TensorFlow Lite

Minigo supports Tensorflow Lite as an inference engine.

First, run a frozen graph through Toco, the TensorFlow optimizing compiler:

```
BATCH_SIZE=8
./cc/tensorflow/toco \
  --input_file=saved_models/000256-opossum.pb \
  --input_format=TENSORFLOW_GRAPHDEF \
  --output_format=TFLITE \
  --output_file=saved_models/000256-opossum.tflite \
  --inference_type=FLOAT \
  --input_type=FLOAT \
  --input_arrays=pos_tensor \
  --output_arrays=policy_output,value_output \
  --input_shapes=8,19,19,17
```

You will also need to build the `//cc:main` target with TensorFlow Lite
support (optionally disabling the TensorFlow and remote inference engines
as shown below):

```
bazel build -c opt --define=tf=0 --define=remote=0 --define=lite=1 cc:main
```


## Style guide

The C++ code follows
[Google's C++ style guide](https://github.com/google/styleguide)
and we use cpplint to delint.

## Remote inference

The C++ runtime supports running inference remotely on a separate process,
potentially on a different machine: one process performs tree search and the
other performs inference. Communication between the two processes is performed
via [gRPC](https://grpc.io/).

In this configuration, the tree search C++ code starts up a gRPC server with
two important methods:

 * `GetFeatures`: called by the inference worker process to get the next batch
    of input features to run inference on.
 * `PutOutputs`: called by the inference worker process at the end of inference
    to send the `policy_output` and `value_output` outputs back to the tree
    search process.

The gRPC server (InferenceServer) and the tree search code run in the same
process and communicate via an InferenceClient. Where the tree search code would
normally perform inference directly, it instead uses the InferenceClient to pass
an inference request to the InferenceServer via a queue. The InferenceClient
then waits for the InferenceServer to pass the request on to the InferenceWorker
and get the results back. The InferenceClient has a blocking API, so all of
these details are hidden from the tree search code.

```
   +-----------------+
   | InferenceWorker |
   |    (TF model)   |
   +-----------------+
            |
           RPC
            |
            v
   +-----------------+
   | InferenceServer |
   |  (gRPC server)  |
   +-----------------+
            ^
            |
       request_queue
            |
   +-----------------+
   | InferenceClient |
   |  (tree search)  |
   +-----------------+
```

The inference worker process is implemented by inference\_worker.py. It wraps
the inference model in a TensorFlow loop that iterates indefinitely. RPC and
DecodeProto operations are inserted at the top of the loop to fetch the input
features from the tree search process. EncodeProto and RPC operations are
inserted at the bottom of the loop to send the inference results back. This
keeps all execution of the InferenceWorker inside TensorFlow for optimal
performance.

Commit message:

Clarify how Python and TensorFlow paths are resolved

cc/README.md, after:

# Minigo C++ implementation

This directory contains a in-developent C++ port of Minigo.

## Set up

The C++ Minigo port uses __version 0.11.1__ of the [Bazel](https://bazel.build/)
build system. We have experienced build issues with the latest version of Bazel,
so for now we recommend installing
[bazel-0.11.1-installer-linux-x86\_64.sh](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/releases).

Minigo++ depends on the Tensorflow C++ libraries, but we have not yet set up
Bazel WORKSPACE and BUILD rules to automatically download and configure
Tensorflow so (for now at least) you must perform a manual step to build the
library:

```shell
./cc/configure_tensorflow.sh
```

If you want to compile for CPU and not GPU, then change `TF_NEED_CUDA` to 0 in
`configure_tensorflow.sh`

This will automatically perform the first steps of
[Installing Tensorflow from Sources](https://www.tensorflow.org/install/install_sources)
but instead of installing the Tensorflow package, it extracts the generated C++
headers into the `cc/tensorflow` subdirectory of the repo. The script then
builds the required Tensorflow shared libraries and copies them to the same
directory. The tensorflow cc\_library build target in cc/BUILD pulls these
header & library files together into a format the Bazel understands how to link
against.

## Building

The C++ Minigo implementation requires that the board size be defined at compile
time, using the `MINIGO_BOARD_SIZE` preprocessor define. This allows us to
significantly reduce the number of heap allocations performed. The build scripts
are configured to compile with `MINIGO_BOARD_SIZE=19` by default. To compile a
version that works with a 9x9 board, invoke Bazel with `--define=board_size=9`.

## Running the unit tests

Minigo's C++ unit tests operate on both 9x9 and 19x19, and some tests are only
enabled for a particular board size. Consequently, you must run the tests
multiple times:

```shell
bazel test --define=board_size=9 cc/...  &&  bazel test cc/...
```

## Running with AddressSanitizer

Bazel supports building with AddressSanitizer to check for C++ memory errors:

```shell
bazel build cc:main \
  --copt=-fsanitize=address \
  --linkopt=-fsanitize=address \
  --copt=-fno-omit-frame-pointer \
  --copt=-O1
```

## Running self play:

The C++ Minigo binary requires the model to be provided in GraphDef binary
proto format.

To run Minigo with a 9x9 model:

```shell
bazel build --define=board_size=9 -c opt cc:main
bazel-bin/cc/main --model=$MODEL_PATH
```

To run Minigo with a 19x19 model:

```shell
bazel build -c opt cc:main
bazel-bin/cc/main --model=$MODEL_PATH
```

The Minigo binary has a lot of command line arguments that configure its
behavior, run it with --helpshort to see the full list.

```shell
bazel-bin/cc/main --helpshort
```

## Design

The general structure of the C++ code tries to follow the Python code where
appropriate, however a lot of the implementation details are different for
performance reasons. In particular, the logic that handles the board state
strives for a small memory footprint and eschews data structures more
sophisticated than a simple array in an effort to minimize memory allocations
and maximize cache locality of data. In doing so, the implementation is kept
fairly simple (there is no need for a LibertyTracker) and at the time of writing
performance of the Position code was more than 450x that of its Python
counterpart.

## Inference engines

C++ Minigo currently supports three separate engines for performing inference:

 - tf: peforms inference using the TensorFlow libraries built by
   `cc/configure_tensorflow.sh`.
 - remote: launches a Python subprocess that performs inference using the
   version of TensorFlow installed on the system. The paths to TensorFlow and
   the Python binary are resolved normally, so the ones from your virtual
   environment will be used if you have one. The remote inference engine is
   required for running Minigo on Cloud TPU.
 - lite: performs inference using TensorFlow Lite, which runs in software on
   the CPU.

The Compilation and linking of these engines into the `//cc:main` binary is
controlled by the Bazel defines `--define=tf=<0,1>`, `--define=remote=<0,1>`
and `--define=lite=<0,1>`.

The choice of which engine to use is controlled by the command line argument
`--engine=<tf,remote,lite>`.

## TensorFlow Lite

Minigo supports Tensorflow Lite as an inference engine.

First, run a frozen graph through Toco, the TensorFlow optimizing compiler:

```
BATCH_SIZE=8
./cc/tensorflow/toco \
  --input_file=saved_models/000256-opossum.pb \
  --input_format=TENSORFLOW_GRAPHDEF \
  --output_format=TFLITE \
  --output_file=saved_models/000256-opossum.tflite \
  --inference_type=FLOAT \
  --input_type=FLOAT \
  --input_arrays=pos_tensor \
  --output_arrays=policy_output,value_output \
  --input_shapes=8,19,19,17
```

You will also need to build the `//cc:main` target with TensorFlow Lite
support (optionally disabling the TensorFlow and remote inference engines
as shown below):

```
bazel build -c opt --define=tf=0 --define=remote=0 --define=lite=1 cc:main
```


## Style guide

The C++ code follows
[Google's C++ style guide](https://github.com/google/styleguide)
and we use cpplint to delint.

## Remote inference

The C++ runtime supports running inference remotely on a separate process,
potentially on a different machine: one process performs tree search and the
other performs inference. Communication between the two processes is performed
via [gRPC](https://grpc.io/).

In this configuration, the tree search C++ code starts up a gRPC server with
two important methods:

 * `GetFeatures`: called by the inference worker process to get the next batch
    of input features to run inference on.
 * `PutOutputs`: called by the inference worker process at the end of inference
    to send the `policy_output` and `value_output` outputs back to the tree
    search process.

The gRPC server (InferenceServer) and the tree search code run in the same
process and communicate via an InferenceClient. Where the tree search code would
normally perform inference directly, it instead uses the InferenceClient to pass
an inference request to the InferenceServer via a queue. The InferenceClient
then waits for the InferenceServer to pass the request on to the InferenceWorker
and get the results back. The InferenceClient has a blocking API, so all of
these details are hidden from the tree search code.

```
   +-----------------+
   | InferenceWorker |
   |    (TF model)   |
   +-----------------+
            |
           RPC
            |
            v
   +-----------------+
   | InferenceServer |
   |  (gRPC server)  |
   +-----------------+
            ^
            |
       request_queue
            |
   +-----------------+
   | InferenceClient |
   |  (tree search)  |
   +-----------------+
```

The inference worker process is implemented by inference\_worker.py. It wraps
the inference model in a TensorFlow loop that iterates indefinitely. RPC and
DecodeProto operations are inserted at the top of the loop to fetch the input
features from the tree search process. EncodeProto and RPC operations are
inserted at the bottom of the loop to send the inference results back. This
keeps all execution of the InferenceWorker inside TensorFlow for optimal
performance.
